---
title: COVID-19 Reproduction Rates
date: 2020-04-22
permalink: /posts/2020/04/blog-post-6/
tags:
  - covid-19
  - reproduction rates
---

## COVID-19 - Keeping an Eye on Reopening of Countries and States


This [notebook](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/gist/ahlusar1989/c97b9f49f6c81488d9167ceb745992c2/r_smoothed.ipynb) is intended to serve as a reference of the various partial economic
reopenings occurring around the world. With the arrival rate of new cases
dropping in almost every country, many countries are relaxing social distancing
practices and allowing the reopening of local businesses. This is an exciting
and nervous time - no one wants another hot reignition of the spread of the
virus.

In addition to monitoring growth rates in the re-opened countries and states, a
new section of the notebook now calculates the reproduction rate $R_t$, which is
a key indicator of the safety of reopening.


## Background

I think it is important for everyone to understand the nature of the growth
patterns of pandemics. There is an excellent Youtube video from
[3Blue1Brown](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCYO_jab_esuFRV4b17AJtAw) that
offers a great explanation.

### Understanding Growth Video Link 

[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kas0tIxDvrg&t=35s)

# Purpose of This Document

This document will maintain a dynamic list of countries and states as they
reopen local businesses. It will track the daily and logistic growth patterns to
identify any flair-ups of the virus.

In addition to the visual tracking of new cases, active cases, and growth rates,
this notebook now incorporates the calculation of the effective reproduction
number R. This is a key variable to track in determining when the situation is
really safe to reopen public venues. We will track changes in R over time. As R
becomes < 1, it is much safer to resume normal activities, because the virus
will not spread.

The addition of the R modeling is inspired by the work from Kevin Systrom,
**Estimating COVID-19's $R_t$ in Real-Time** [here](https://github.com/k-sys/covid-19/blob/master/Realtime%20R0.ipynb).


## Starting Observations

As of April 22, 2020, there are about 6 European countries that have some form
of reopening in place.
* Denmark - reopened daycare and primary schools on April 14. April 20 saw
reopening of hairdressers, tattooists, and psychologists.
* Austria - April 14 non-essintial shops with floor space < 400 square meters.
May 1, this extended to shopping centers.
* Norway - April 20 - kindergartens. Primary and some high schools on April 27,
along with universities, beauty salons. Domestic travel is allowed but
discouraged.
* Germany - April 20, shops < 800 square meters, along with car showrooms,
bookstores, and bicycle shops. Schools on May 4th.
* Switzerland - April 27 hairdressers, hardware stores, beauty salons and flower
shops.  Also non-essential medical care.
* Sweden - Never closed down so it is included as a reference point.
* Georgia - First US state to reopen. It includes hair and nail salons, barber
shops, massage businesses and gyms.

In the next two weeks, several US states are scheduled to reopen. They will be
added as the reopening occurs.

## Observation Log

* 2020-04-26 - European reopening countries are all ok, although Germany's R
value has moved above 1. Sweden still shows increasing cases; they probably have
not reached an inflection point.

## Change History

* 2020-03-18 - Addressed a problem with some of the curve fitting not
converging. Because some of the countries, like the US, had a long period of
days with no increases of cases, the tracking start date.
* 2020-03-18 - Added US "hot" states, NY, CA, and WA. Also added Germany, which
has shown rapid recent growth.
* 2020-03-19 - Added Colorado, per friend request. Also added France and 2 high
density countries, Monaco and Singapore
* 2020-03-20 - Removed Monaco, not enough cases
* 2020-03-21 - Added Switzerland, New Jersey, Louisiana, and 12 'hot' European
countries as a group
* 2020-03-22 - Added United Kingdom and UK to hot European group
* 2020-03-23 - Changed South Korea extract, due to a data change in source;
moved Iran to the logistic curve section;
* 2020-03-24 - Changed dataset source due to issues with corona-virus-
report/covid_19_clean_complete.csv; United Kingdom is called UK on this dataset
* 2020-03-27 - Added more US states: Massachusetts, Florida, Michigan, Illinois.
Add new cases tracking graph. Removed Iran from logistic graph.
* 2020-03-30 - Added Sweden to country tracking because they are not enforcing
any social distancing rules. Also added India because of population size.
* 2020-03-31 - Moved Italy, Spain, Hot European, and New York to the logistic
plot.
* 2020-04-02 - Added Washington to logistic plot. Corrected error with negative
growth rates.
* 2020-04-05 - Added Germany, California, Washington to logistic plot. Corrected
error with negative growth rates.
* 2020-04-06 - Added Louisiana, Massachusetts, Florida, and the rest of the
world without China to logistic plots.
* 2020-04-08 - Added United States to logistic plots.
* 2020-04-22 - Converted this to a reopening tracker
* 2020-04-22 - Added Rt tracking

## About Coronavirus

* Coronaviruses are **zoonotic** viruses (means transmitted between animals and
people).
* Symptoms include from fever, cough, respiratory symptoms, and breathing
difficulties.
* In severe cases, it can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS), kidney failure and even death.
* Coronaviruses are also asymptomatic, means a person can be a carrier for the
infection but experiences no symptoms

## Novel coronavirus (nCoV)
* A **novel coronavirus (nCoV)** is a new strain that has not been previously
identified in humans.

## COVID-19 (Corona Virus Disease 2019)
* Caused by a **SARS-COV-2** corona virus.
* First identified in **Wuhan, Hubei, China**. Earliest reported symptoms
reported in **November 2019**.
* First cases were linked to contact with the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market,
which sold live animals.
* On 30 January the WHO declared the outbreak to be a Public Health Emergency of
International Concern

# Acknowledgements

This effort was inspired by an excellent Youtube video from
[3Blue1Brown](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCYO_jab_esuFRV4b17AJtAw)

* [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kas0tIxDvrg&t=35s)
* [Starting kernel](https://www.kaggle.com/imdevskp/covid-19-analysis-viz-
prediction-comparisons)
* [CSSE GIS and Data](https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19)
* [Generalized logistic growth modeling of the COVID-19 outbreak in 29 provinces in China and in the rest ofthe world](https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2003/2003.05681.pdf)
* [Kevin Systrom's Notebook](https://github.com/k-sys/covid-19/blob/master/Realtime%20R0.ipynb)


